+++
title = "[6/10] Brené Brown's Daring Greatly"
date = "2023-08-17"
author = "Robert"
description = ""
draft = true
+++

# Summary

In Daring Greatly, Brené Brown writes about how shame and vulnerability, or more
importantly how we deal with it, define who we are and how it shapes our future.
Although everyone has experience with shame and vulnerability, everyone
understands it in a different way. Brené has worked as a researcher on this
topic for many years, and  in research it is always important to work with
definitions. The way she defines shame is as *the fear of not belonging*. It is
the feeling we get when do something wrong, when we forget someone's birthday or
when we are running late. It is written in our DNA that we are social animals,
or as Brené writes

"We are hardwired to connect with others, it's what gives purpose and meaning to
our lives, and without it there is suffering."

And (un)luckily for us evolution has given us a number of tools to ensure that
we build and sustain this connection. Shame is one of those tools, which drives and
pushes us towards behavior that we expect to benefit social connections. 

But as we all know and experienced, shame is not a nice feeling to have and
often it does not work in our best interest. Feelings of shame can prevent us
from giving presentations, speaking up during meetings, talking to that cute
girl at a party, or to try out new hobbies. This however does not mean that we
should seek to become resistant to shame. Brené argues that the goal is to
become shame *resilient*. Despite feeling shameful and vulnerable, and despite
all the discomfort, we should all dare greatly. 

In the book, Brené starts of with discussing how today's society has caused all
of us to be taken hold of shame. We live in a time where nothing is ever enough,
we do not have enough time, not enough money, not enough holiday, not enough
clothing, not enough movies. It is never enough, but we do feel better than
those who have less than us. Those that have money can look down on people who
do not have it, those who are smart look down on people who are dumb. Of course,
not everyone is like this, but we feel like this is true. Growing up poor will
make you feel shameful because of the idea that others will look down on you.
And this whole notion of not being good enough, stems from what Brené calls the
*scarcity culture*. It is not only about what we have, but also what we do. We
want to be fun and feel bad if we're not fun at a party, or if no-one laughs at
our jokes. In a *scarcity culture*, Brené says

"the greatest casualties [...] are our willingness to own our vulnerabilities
and our ability to engage with the world from a place of worthiness

However, feeling shameful, being exposed and being vulnerable does not make you
weak, Brené says. We let our fear of disconnection to become disapproval and
critique, but is it not courageous and respectful if we own up to our
vulnerability? In relationships, we share our insecurities, our fears and allow
ourselves to be vulnerable. Does to love and to be loved, make you weak? Of
course not, Brené says. As the book title says, it is all about daring greatly.

Many of us have over time developed strategies and behaviors to prevent us from
feeling shameful. This ranges from wearing imaginary masks, setting up shields
and walls, distracting ourselves or even using anger to overrun our feelings of
shame. This however does not offer us true protection. The mask falls of and the
shield will break at some point

===

[x] culture of never enough

[x] being exposed and being vulnerable does not equate weakness

[x] talking about shame enables us to fight it

[ ] what we do to protect ourselves from shame

the gap between what we preach and what we practice + disengagement

shame at work and education

shame in parenting





x the greatest casualties of a scarcity culture are our willingness to own our
vulnerabilities and our ability to engage with the world from a place of
worthiness

x yes, we are totally exposed when we are vulnerable. Yes, we are in the torture
chamber that we call uncertainty. And, yes, we're taking a huge emotional risk
when we allow ourselves to be vulnerable. But there's no equation where taking
risks, braving uncertainty, and opening ourselves up to emotional exposure
equals weakness.

x rather than respecting and appreciating the courage and daring behind
vulnerability, we let our fear and discomfort become judgment and criticism.

[x] love is uncertain. it;s incredibly risky. and loving someone leaves us
emotionally exposed.

Far from being an effective shield, the illusion of invulnerability undermines
the very response that would have supplied genuine protection.

we're afraid that our truth isn't enough that what we have to offer isn't enough
without the bells and whistles, without editing and impressing

when we were children we used to think that when we were grown up we would no
longer be vulnerable. but to grow up is to accept vulnerability. to be alive is
to be vulnerable.

is about sharing our feelings and our experiences with people who have earned
the right to hear them. being vulnerable and open is mutual and integral part of
the trust-building process.

trust is a product of vulnerability that grows over time and requires work,
attention and full engagement. trust isn't a grand gesture it's a growing marble
collection.

the shield required that i stay small and quiet behind it so as not to draw
attention to my imperfections and vulnerabilities, not despite them.

only when we're brave enough to explore the darkness will we discover the
infinite power of our light.

a sense of worthiness inspires us to be vulnerable, share openly and persevere.
shame keeps us small, resentful and afraid.

in shame-prone cultures, where parents, leaders and administrators consciously
or unconsciously encourage people to connect their self-worth to what they
produce, I see disengagement, blame, gossip, stagnation, favoritism, and a total
dearth of creativity and innovation.

that deep fear we all have of being wrong, of being belittled and of feeling
less than, is what stops us taking the very risks required to move our companies
forward.

this notion that the leader needs to be "in charge" and to "know al the answers"
is both dated and destructive. its impact on others is the sense that hey know
less and that they are less than. a recipe for risk aversion if ever i have
heard it. shame becomes feat. fear leads to risk aversion. risk aversion kill
innovation.

for example, I was recently struggling to finish an article. I called a good
friend to tell her about my writer's block and she immediately responded by
asking, "what are the gremlins saying?" this is a  very effective way of asking
about the shame tapes, the messages of self-doubt and self-criticism that we
carry around in our heads. my answer was "there are a few of them. one's saying
that my writing sucks and that no one cares about these topics. another one's
telling me that i'm going to get criticized and i'll deserve it. and the big one
keeps saying, 'real writers don't struggle like this. real writers don't dangle
their modifiers."

shame resilience is the ability to say "this hurts. this is disappointing, maybe
even devastating. but success and recognition and approval are not the values
that drive me my value is courage and i was just courageous. you can move on,
shame."

first shame is the fear of disconnection

its the fear that something we've done of failed to do, an ideal that we've no
lived up to, or a goal that we've not accomplished makes us unworthy of
connection.

shame is the intensely painful feeling of experience of believing hat are flawed
and therefore unworthy of love and belonging

guilt is just as powerful as shame, but its influence is positive, while shame's
is destructive

researchers don't find shame correlated with positive outcomes at all-there are
no daa to support that shame is helpful compass for good behavior. in fact,
shame is much more likely to be the cause of destructive and hurtful behaviors
than it is to be the solution.

i loves writing for my community of readers, because preaching to the choir is
easy and relatively safe.

often the children who are engaging i n the bullying behaviors or vying for
social ranking by putting down others have parents who engage in the same
behaviors.

shame is universal, but the messages and expectations that drive shame are
organized by gender

when shame starts creeping up on them, or they find themselves fully in shame,
they can reality-check these "norms" thus practicing the second element of shame
resilience-critical awareness. basically they can choose consciously not to play
along.

to love ourselves and support each other in the process of becoming real is
perhaps the greatest single act of daring greatly

sharing yourself to teach or move a process forward can be healthy and
effective, but disclosing information as a way to work through your personal
stuff is inappropriate and unethical

I only share when I have to unmet needs that i'm trying to fill

serpentining is the perfect metaphor for how we spend enormous energy trying to
dodge vulnerability when it would take far less effort to face it straight on.

when we stop caring about what people think, we lose ou capacity of connections.

i think of strategy as the game plan, or the detailed answer to the question
what do we want to achieve and how are we going to get there

culture on the other hand is less about what we want to achieve and more about
who we are

the darkest areas fof our lives, disconnection, disengagement and our struggle
for worthiness

disengagement is the issue underlying the majority of problems i see in families
schools communities and organizations and it takes many forms

we disengage to protect ourselves from vulnerability, shame and feeling lost and
without purpose.

we don't intentionally create cultures in our families, school, communities and
organizations tha fuel disengagement and disconnection, so how does it happen?
where's the gap?

the space between our practices values and our aspirational values is the value
gap or what i call the disengagement divide.

to reignite creativity, innovation and learning, leaders must rehumanize
education and work. this means understanding how scarcity is affectin the way we
lead and work, learning how to engage with vulnerability and recognizing and
combatting shame

there are times when you can ask questions or challenge ideas, but if you've got
a teacher that doesn't like that or the kids in the class make fun people who do
that, it's bad. i think most of us earn that it's the best to just keep your
head down your mouth shut and your grades high.

in an organized culture where respect and the dignity of the individuals are
held as the highest values, shame and blame don't work as management styles.
there is n leading by fear. empathy is a values asset, accountability is an
expectation rather than an exception and he primal human need for belonging is
not used as leverage and social control. we can't control the behavior of
individuals; however we can cultivate organizational cultures where behaviors
are not tolerated and people are held accountable for practicing what matters
most: human beings

when I asked people why there aws sch a lack of feedback in their organizations
and schools they used different langues, but the two major issues where the
same: we're not comfortable with hard conversations. we don't know how to give
and receive feedback in a way that moves people and processes forward.

we believe growth and learning are uncomfortable so its going to happen here-
you're going to feel that way. we want you to know its normal and its an
expectation here. you're not alone and we ask that you stay open and lean into
it.\

critical pedagogy by writers like bell hooks and paulo freire

the big challenges for leaders is getting our head and hearts around the fact
that we need to cultivate the courage to be uncomfortable and to each the people
around us how to accept discomfort as a part of growth

the research has made this clear: vulnerability is at the heart of the feedback
process. this is true whether we give receive or solicit feedback. and the
vulnerability doesn't go away even if we're trained and experienced in offering
and getting feedback. experience does, however, give us the advantage of knowing
that we can survive the exposure and uncertainty and that its worth the risk.

i'm good at anger and only so-so at vulnerability so armoring up before a
vulnerable experience is attractive to me. luckily this work as taught me that
when i feel self-righteous, it means im afraid when i'm afraid of being wrong,
making someone angry or getting blamed.

i don't know how a single person who can be open to accepting feedback or woning
responsibility of something when they're being hammered. our hard wiring takes
over and we self-protect.

leadership is scarce because few people are willing to go through the discomfort
required to lead

if you're not uncomfortable in your work as a leader, its almost certain you're
not reaching your potential as a leader

who we are and how we engage with the world are much stronger predictors of how
our children will do than we we know about parenting

shame is so painful for children because it is inextricably inked to the fear of
being unlovable

fitting in is about assessing a situation and becoming who you need to be in
order to b e accepted. belonging on the other hand doesn't require us to change
who we are it requires us to be who we are

daring greatly is not about winning or losing. its about courage


- understanding and being able to talk about shame removes the power it has over
us. - growing up, we put on shields and masks to numb and distract ourselves
from feeling shame. but that's no good. - align values with your actions and
behaviors - shame on the workplace and in education - shame in parenting 

coping with shame

